nikopj@s15:~/Documents/OS/hw4$ ./cgm.out Frodo lotr1.txt lotr2.txt lotr3.txt
to tackle the journey of Frodo to Mordor. These chapters, eventually to 
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly 
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very 
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still 
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he 
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was 
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost 
The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo Baggins. 
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to 
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September 
'You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said Bilbo one day; 'and 
time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible 
and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of 
were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill 
'But what about this Frodo that lives with him?' asked Old Noakes of 
wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is 
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying 
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. ' 
looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo 
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated 
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in 
Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory 
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of 'Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old 
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what 
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again. 
Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he 
present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo 
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put 
'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as 
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?' 
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after 
'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest.' He drew 
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait 
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep 
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always 
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it, but 
'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still, 
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to 
but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the 
Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and 
surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had 
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the 
Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that the 
In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo 
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely. 
they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of 
unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things specially 
Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He 
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped 
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out 
'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo 
cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo 
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on 
'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your 
'My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room 
ring, Frodo ! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last 
'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He 
us, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further. It's mine 
'I don't understand,' said Frodo. 
'At once!' cried Frodo. 'Why, I thought you were staying on for at 
'Some people!' exclaimed Frodo. 'You mean Otho and Lobelia. How 
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked 
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually 
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not 
'If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps 
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the 
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving 
name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping 
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of 
said; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of 
Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master 
suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths 
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the 
hobbits asked no more. But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far 
Frodo's fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the 
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where you get your news from, you'll never 
Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again. 
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings. 
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo 
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. They 
'Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!' 
'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked 
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo 
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep in 
'A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not die, but 
'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound 
'How long have you known this?' asked Frodo at length. 'And how much 
'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo, 'so I have 
'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again. 
Frodo. But if you mean "known about this ring", well, I still do not know, 
'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.' 
'There wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?' asked Frodo 
Frodo shuddered. 'But why should we be?' he asked. 'And why should he 
'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what 
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain 
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in 
'No,' said Frodo. 'There are none. It is quite plain, and it never 
'Well then, look!' To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard 
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo 
'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look from 
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. 
It is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received it on his 
As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest 
I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice. 
Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast 
'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo. 
time that is given, us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look 
'And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One had 
'Why, why wasn't it destroyed?' cried Frodo. 'And how did the Enemy 
'Gollum!' cried Frodo. 'Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very 
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!' 
'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and 
'What do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his precious and 
'You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,' 
'A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off 
aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things. 
'What, just in time to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an Ore have 
'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying to 
It is not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure that I understand you. 
Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I have 
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just now in this room, of course,' answered the 
'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 
'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo. 
'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo. 
'Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't he 
I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may 
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating. 
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the 
'But this is terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far worse than the worst that I 
without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so 
'I am sorry,' said Frodo. 'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any 
'No, and I don't want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you 
'All the same,' said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I 
'Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has 
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even sent me a message, I would 
Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It now 
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was 
Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily 
'I do really wish to destroy it!' cried Frodo. 'Or, well, to have it 
outside whistling. 'And now,' said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the 
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this burden, as long as It is yours 
was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the 
'No!' answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and 
'I hope so,' said Frodo. 'But I hope that you may find some other 
'My dear Frodo!' exclaimed Gandalf. 'Hobbits really are amazing 
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was 
'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't 
'He won't hurt you,' said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing, 
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?' 
'It can't be helped, Sam,' said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized 
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!' 
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to 
'What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?' asked Frodo. 'I 
He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will 
'As for where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be difficult to give 
Frodo. 'For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What is to be my 
'No indeed!' said Frodo. 'But in the meantime what course am I to 
'Rivendell!' said Frodo. 'Very good: I will go east, and I will make 
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed 
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more 
hints of Mr. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was running out: he was 
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. 
the end of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he 
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. 
At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what 
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf 
word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and 
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home, 
by way of the Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious, 
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was 
good wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the 
claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as 
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff 
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party 
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo was 
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going 
Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said Lobelia, 
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea. 
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by 
'Our last meal at Bag End!' said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They 
Frodo 
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact 
Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo 
'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo. 
Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. 'Run 
'Well, now we're off at last!' said Frodo. They shouldered their packs 
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He 
'I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,' said Frodo. 'I 
'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a 
peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell. 
'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no 
fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they 
The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that 
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and then 
'I don't keep water in my pockets,' said Frodo. 'We thought you had 
'You can come too,' said Frodo, 'and bring all the water-bottles.' 
'Not that I ever heard,' said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was 
'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it 
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and 
far. 'I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as 
far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second: 
When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped. 
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and he 
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until he 
'Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said Frodo to 
flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and 
'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they 
'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment. 
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a 
'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I 
'I wish I had waited for Gandalf,' Frodo muttered. 'But perhaps it 
'I don't know, and I would rather not guess,' said Frodo. 'All right, 
cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present, if you want to be 
'Yes, I think we will move on now,' said Frodo; 'but not on the road 
Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo. 
and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water -valley and 
'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.' 
'Don't let us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I 
large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It 
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass 
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent 
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time 
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. 
'Yes, it is Elves,' said Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes in the 
'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.' 
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the 
was the song as Frodo heard it: 
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement, 'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen 
'Hail, Frodo!' he cried. 'You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps 
'The meaning of it, fair people,' said Frodo, 'is simply that we seem 
'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return. 
'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo. 
still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? 
was speechless. 'I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. 
Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo. 'Come now with your friends and join 
'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo. 
saved him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream, 
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions 
'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo. 
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was 
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and 
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor. 
They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned Gildor 
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to 
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent. 
'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said 
'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to 
'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?' 
hints and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew that danger lay ahead, of 
'And it is also said,' answered Frodo: 'Go not to the Elves for 
'I am deeply grateful,' said Frodo; 'but I wish you would tell me 
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of 
'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I chiefly 
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished speaking. 'I 
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made by a 
Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. 'What is the plan for 
'To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,' answered Frodo, and 
'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking the reminder. 'But I hope to 
'Not much - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask 
'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full. 
Frodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don't want to answer 
From Frodo' s mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought 
'They are,' said Frodo. 'Do you like them still, now you have had a 
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward 
Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked 
'We can cut straighter than the road anyway,' answered Frodo. 'The 
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that 
'That settles it!' said Frodo. 'Short cuts make delays, but inns make 
'I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of private 
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line. 
'Look!' he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and on 
They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, and 
'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't 
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam 
Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo 
'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or a signal 