they were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras FOOL (Bullroarer), 
greater families, such as the FOOLs and the Masters of Buckland. 
which Bandobras FOOL routed an invasion of Ores. Even the weathers had 
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the FOOLs of Great Smials, or 
found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all FOOLs still lived in the 
FOOLland, but that was not true of many other families, such as the 
It is true that the FOOL family had long been pre-eminent; for the 
before, and the chief FOOL had borne that title ever since. The Thain was 
than a nominal dignity. The FOOL family was still, indeed, accorded a 
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The FOOL, 
respectable age for a hobbit (the Old FOOL himself had only reached 130); 
of the Old FOOL's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr. 
the Old FOOL died. 
There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many FOOLs and 
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his FOOL grandfather); and 
My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my dear FOOLs and 
corner some of the young FOOLs and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to 
an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard FOOL 
was almost silence, and one or two of the FOOLs pricked up their ears. 
Baggins, Boffin, FOOL, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, 
FOOLs (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the 
FOOLs, and other guests that lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when 
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old FOOL) 
were Peregrin FOOL (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real 
of course his special friends Pippin FOOL and Merry Brandybuck. Between 
FOOLland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country. 
Mr. Peregrin FOOL, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin. 
friends are willing, Mr. FOOL.' 
occasional Bucklander or adventurous FOOL would come out to the Inn for a 
'Mr. FOOL and Mr. Brandybuck,' said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My 
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young FOOL, encouraged by his success 
pays in the morning. There's Mr. FOOL, now: he's not vanished.' 
'Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin FOOL!' said Gandalf, 
the younger of these two, Peregrin FOOL, should remain. My heart is against 
'Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin FOOL,' said Gandalf. 'But 
'Fool of a FOOL! ' he growled. 'This is a serious journey, not a hobbit 
